## Database Systems - Overview
### _Homework_
1. Database models
	- Hierarchical (tree) - e.g. filesystem where we have folders and within them other folders with files, every element has a parent, except the root element. This model is called node in the data strustures.
    - Network / graph - Objects that have relations between them, but there isn't a root element. 
    - Relational (table) - every object is a record that follows some rules e.g. rows in an excel document. Relational data bases are groups of tables. Realtion in databases is connectin between a column in one table to a column in another table.
    - Object-oriented - objects has relation to other objects. 
2. Main function performed by a Relational Database Management System (RDBMS)
    - Creating / altering / deleting tables and relationships between them (database schema)
    - Adding, changing, deleting, searching and retrieving of data stored in the tables
    - Support for the SQL language
    - Transaction management (optional)
3. Tables are:
	- Database tables consist of data, arranged in rows and columns
	- All rows have the same structure
	- Columns have name and type (number, string, date, image, or other)
	- The schema of a table is an ordered sequence of column specifications (name and type)
4. Primary is a column of the table that uniquely identifies its rows, foreign key is identificator for data in another table and the records in the current table relate to the information from the other table using this foreign key.Relationships between tables are based on interconnections: primary key / foreign key.
5. different kinds of relationships between tables:
	-  One-to-many – e.g. country / towns
	-  Many-to-many – e.g. student / course
	-  One-to-one – e.g. example human / student
6. When is a certain database schema normalized?
	-  Normalization of the relational schema removes repeating data
	-  Non-normalized schemas can contain many data repetitions<br/>
	<br/>
What are the advantages of normalized databases?:
	-    Searching, sorting, and creating indexes is faster, since tables are narrower, and more rows fit on a data page.
	-    You usually have more tables.
	-    You can have more clustered indexes (one per table), so you get more flexibility in tuning queries.
	-    Index searching is often faster, since indexes tend to be narrower and shorter.
	-    More tables allow better use of segments to control physical placement of data.
	-    You usually have fewer indexes per table, so data modification commands are faster.
	-    Fewer null values and less redundant data, making your database more compact.
	-    Triggers execute more quickly if you are not maintaining redundant data.
	-    Data modification anomalies are reduced.
	-    Normalization is conceptually cleaner and easier to maintain and change as your needs change.
7. What are database integrity constraints and when are they used?<br/>
Integrity constraints ensure data integrity in the database tables
	-	Primary key constraint - Ensures that the primary key of a table has unique value for each table row
	-	Unique key constraint - Ensures that all values in a certain column (or a group of columns) are unique
	-	Foreign key constraint - Ensures that the value in given column is a key from another table
	-	Check constraint - Ensures that values in a certain column meet some predefined condition
8. Point out the pros and cons of using indexes in a database.<br/>
Pros:
	-	Indices speed up searching of values in a certain column or group of columns 
	-	it is useful for big tables only (e.g. 50 000 rows), because it is implemented as b-tree data structures. For smaller tables the searching of certain record is faster if we loop throgh the all values.
Cons
	-	Adding and deleting records in indexed tables is slower!
9. What's the main purpose of the SQL language? - Standardized declarative language for manipulation of relational databases. SQL statements are used to perform tasks such as update data on a database, or retrieve data from a database.
10. What are transactions used for? - Transactions are a sequence of database operations which are executed as a single unit:
    -	Either all of them execute successfully
    -	Or none of them is executed at all
Transactions guarantee the consistency and the integrity of the database.    All changes in a transaction are temporary. Changes become final when COMMIT is successfully executed. At any time all changes done in the transaction can be cancelled by executing rollback
Example: A bank transfer from one account into another (withdrawal + deposit). If either the withdrawal or the deposit fails the entire operation should be cancelled. If a customer withdraw money from a bank account the operation is finished after the final commit.During the whole operation of withdrawing the money the account is locked for the other clients which prevents another person to withdraw money from the same account at the same time. 
11. What is a NoSQL database?
A NoSQL ("non SQL" or "not only SQL") database provides a mechanism for storage and retrieval of data that is modeled in means other than the tabular relations used in relational databases. NoSQL databases are increasingly used in big data and real-time web applications.
	-	Use document-based model (non-relational)
	-	Schema-free document storage
	-	Still support CRUD operations - Create, Read, Update, Delete
	-	Still support indexing and querying
	-	Still supports concurrency and transactions
	-	Highly optimized for append / retrieve
	-	Great performance and scalability
12. Explain the classical non-relational data models.
	-	Column - A column of a distributed data store is a NoSQL object of the lowest level in a keyspace. It is a tuple (a key-value pair) consisting of three elements:
		-	Unique name: Used to reference the column
		-	Value: The content of the column. It can have different types, like AsciiType, LongType, TimeUUIDType, UTF8Type among others.
		-	Timestamp: The system timestamp used to determine the valid content.
	
	- Document model - The central concept of a document store is the notion of a "document". While each document-oriented database implementation differs on the details of this definition, in general, they all assume that documents encapsulate and encode data (or information) in some standard formats or encodings. Encodings in use include XML, YAML, and JSON as well as binary forms like BSON. Documents are addressed in the database via a unique key that represents that document. One of the other defining characteristics of a document-oriented database is that in addition to the key lookup performed by a key-value store, the database offers an API or query language that retrieves documents based on their contents. Different implementations offer different ways of organizing and/or grouping documents:
		-	Collections
		-	Tags
		-	Non-visible metadata
		-	Directory hierarchies<br/>
	Compared to relational databases, for example, collections could be considered analogous to tables and documents analogous to records. But they are different: every record in a table has the same sequence of fields, while documents in a collection may have fields that are completely different. Examples: 	Clusterpoint, Couchbase, CouchDB, DocumentDB, Lotus Notes, MarkLogic, MongoDB, Qizx, XML-databases
	-	Key-value (KV) stores use the associative array (also known as a map or dictionary) as their fundamental data model. In this model, data is represented as a collection of key-value pairs, such that each possible key appears at most once in the collection. The key-value model is one of the simplest non-trivial data models, and richer data models are often implemented on top of it. The key-value model can be extended to an ordered model that maintains keys in lexicographic order. This extension is powerful, in that it can efficiently process key ranges.Key-value stores can use consistency models ranging from eventual consistency to serializability. Some support ordering of keys. Some maintain data in memory (RAM), while others employ solid-state drives or rotating disks. Examples include Oracle NoSQL Database, redis, and dbm.<br/>
13. Give few examples of NoSQL databases and their pros and cons.
	- MongoDB
		- Pros		
			-   Schema-less. If you have a flexible schema, this is ideal for a document store like MongoDB. This is difficult to implement in a performant manner in RDBMS.
			-   Ease of scale-out. Scale reads by using replica sets. Scale writes by using sharding (auto balancing).
			-   Cost. MongoDB is free and can run on Linux.
			-   You can choose what level of consistency you want depending on the value of the data.
	   - Cons
            -	Data size in MongoDB is typically higher due to e.g. each document has field names stored it.
            -	Less flexibility with querying.
            -	No support for transactions - certain atomic operations are supported, at a single document level.
            -	Less up to date information available/fast evolving product.
    -	Redis
        -	Pros
            -	Stores data in a variety of formats: list, array, sets and sorted sets.
            -	Multiple commands at once.
            -	Blocking reads - it will wait until another process writes data to the cache.
            -	Mass insertion of data to prime a cache.
            -	Partitions data across multiple redis instances.
            -	Can back data to disk.
       - Cons
            -	Super complex to configure - requires consideration of data size to configure well.
            -	Lots of server administration for monitoring and partitioning and balancing.
    -	Cassandra
        -	Pros
            -	Cassandra is solving the problem of distributed and scalable systems, and it's built to cope with data management challenges of modern business.
            -	Cassandra is decentralized system - there is no single point of failure, if minimum required setup for cluster is present - every node in the cluster has the same role, and every node can service any request. Replication strategies can be configured. It is possible to add new nodes to server cluster very easy. Also, if one node fails, data can be retrieved from some of the other nodes (redundancy can be tuned). It is especially suitable for multiple data-center deployment, redundancy, failover and disaster recovery, with possibility of replication across multiple data centers.
        -	Cons
            -	There is no referential integrity - there is no concept of JOIN connections in Cassandra.
            -	Querying options for retrieving data are very limited.
            -	There is no things like ORDER BY, GROUP BY.













    


