

1. SQL is a special-purpose programming language designed for managing data held in a relational database management system (RDBMS), or for stream processing in a relational data stream management system (RDSMS).
Originally based upon relational algebra and tuple relational calculus, SQL consists of a data definition language, data manipulation language, and a data control language. Although SQL is often described as, and to a great extent is, a declarative language (4GL), it also includes procedural elements.
The scope of SQL includes data insert, query, update and delete, schema creation and modification, and data access control.
	- What is DML? - Data Manipulation Language. A data manipulation language (DML) is a family of syntax elements similar to a computer programming language used for selecting, inserting, deleting and updating data in a database. Performing read-only queries of data is sometimes also considered a component of DML.
	- What is DDL? - A data manipulation language (DML) is a family of syntax elements similar to a computer programming language used for selecting, inserting, deleting and updating data in a database. Performing read-only queries of data is sometimes also considered a component of DML.
	- SQL commands
		- SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE
		- CREATE, DROP, ALTER
		- GRANT, REVOKE

1. What is Transact-SQL (T-SQL)? - Transact-SQL (T-SQL) is Microsoft's and Sybase's proprietary extension to SQL. T-SQL expands on the SQL standard to include procedural programming, local variables, various support functions for string processing, date processing, mathematics, etc. and changes to the DELETE and UPDATE statements. These additional features make Transact-SQL Turing complete.
Transact-SQL is central to using Microsoft SQL Server. All applications that communicate with an instance of SQL Server do so by sending Transact-SQL statements to the server, regardless of the user interface of the application.

 

